27/02/2023
V1.0

Enviro Sensing HAT Concept Proposal
EEE3088

Q1 Enviro sensing HAT Concept
This project’s Hardware Attached on Top (HAT) board will consist of two main features, namely: a
temperature and pressure sensor. These sensors will be utilized in a multitude of cases by simply
connecting it to the STM32 PCB board and to a constant power supply, whether portable or fixed.
The multipurpose functionality of the HAT makes it a practical tool for end-users as it is cost-effective
and convenient furthermore it notifies users about environment changes which can prevent mishaps.
One use case of this sensor would be a maintaining the pressure and temperature of a wine cellar. It
can be mounted to a wall near a socket with a constant power supply in the cellar and alert the user
when either temperature or pressure is no longer compatible. Another case would be a tool for hikers
to monitor pressure levels whilst hiking in higher altitudes. A sudden change detected in either sensor
will alert users as they continue or function as an indicator to opt for a different route. Lastly, it would
be in the mining industry; miners can use this device to detect when the conditions become
inhospitable, and this can mitigate risk of casualties.
Q2 Requirements
Scenario 1: Individual User Application/Smart Home System
Sensors are needed to automate certain home appliances in a smart home. Temperature and
barometer sensors are a valuable measurement device as most appliances involve temperature and
pressure fluctuations such as extractor fans and cooling systems. Apart from appliances, clients may
use sensors to observe readings for things like plant care, preservation of consumables and even
heating.
• R1.1: In a smart home system, users require a pressure sensor to detect when there is
excessive steam in the bathroom to alert the user that the extractor fan needs to be turned
on.
• R1.2: For wine storage in homes and transportation to homes, the pressure needs to be
maintained to prevent the bottles from exploding. Users will require the sensor to measure
the pressure in the cellar and during transit and be alerted if the pressure is too high.
Consumables like vegetables can also be preserved better when the user is able to observe
how much heat the perishables are being subjected to.
• R1.3: During loadshedding, air conditions will stop functioning and spaces will heat up. A
temperature sensor that alerts users that the temperature has surpassed a certain point is
convenient.
• R1.4: During cooking, the kitchen heats up and there is a presence of steam. Users will require
the sensor to detect when conditions exceed bearable amounts.
• R1.5: Users require a temperature sensor for even heating. Readings can be taken all over
necessary space to see which areas need attention.
Scenario 2: Outdoor Use
Outdoor physical activities such as hiking, climbing, and camping are all impacted by temperature and
pressure. Altitude and temperature determine the conditions for these activities. If users are able to
constantly observe any fluctuations, then they may be equipped to deal with any difficulties.
• R2.1: Increase in altitude results in lower pressure levels and lower oxygen levels. Users such
as hikers require the sensor to read and record pressure levels and alert the user when oxygen
levels are getting dangerously low. This allows users to remain safe and choose a safe path.
• R2.2: Often camping trips last several days and requires campers to cook to drink water using
a gas stove. The atmospheric pressure level determines the boiling point therefore users need
the sensor to report the pressure level. This will give the user an idea of how long it would
take to cook food or boil water for drinking.
• R2.3: Hikers in remote locations don’t have signal coverage therefore the temperature sensor
is the only way to observe temperature and precisely for that specific location. Users require
this insight to avoid dangerously extreme temperatures.
Scenario 3: Medical Practitioners and Treatment
Medical practices require specific temperature control to preserve medicine, cells and prevent
bacteria growth. Pharmaceutical production needs to be done in a controlled environment with
specified temperature and pressure. Certain medical treatments are based purely of heat and
pressure control therefore it is important to be able to monitor temperature closely.
• R3.1: Hyperbaric chamber treatment requires accurate pressure levels therefore users require
the sensor to read and store and change in pressure. Thermotherapy requires temperature to
be monitored.
• R3.2: Production of medicine and pharmaceuticals requires good ventilations and
temperature control; the sensor allows medical professionals to accurately set conditions.
• R3.3: Operating theatres require low temperatures to prevent bacteria growth. A temperature
sensor indicates to doctors when that level has been exceeded. Automatic room ventilation
may be set to a specific value but factors like light and equipment heat dissipation varies the
actual temperature therefore the sensor produces accurate readings.
Scenario 4: Mining Industry
Mines pose a threat to miners when excavating therefore companies need to ensure the safety of
their employees. As miners excavate deeper into the ground, the pressure levels increase. Excavation
also requires the use of explosives which impacts the temperature and pressure of the environment
that miners are subjected to. It would be in the best interest of mining companies to implement
sensors to safeguard themselves from lawsuits and protect their employees.
• R4.1: When tunneling deeper into the mines, the pressure increases which has short term
dangers and long term impacts on the health of miners. The barometer will alert miners on
dangerous pressure levels.
• R4.2: The temperature in mines determines working conditions. As miners get closer to the
core of the Earth, the temperature will rise. Higher temperatures may cause expensive
machinery to malfunction and be detrimental to miners short term health. A temperature
sensor that continuously detects temperature changes is required for efficient operations
within the mine.
• R4.3: When controlled explosions are used in mines, reactions are exothermic causing
temperature and pressure to spike unpredictably. Temperature and pressure spikes may
cause uncontrolled combustion in the mines. Mining companies require the sensor to monitor
pressure and temperature levels and alert the user if dangerous levels are reached.
Q4 Link to Team Git Repository
https://github.com/EEE3088
Q3 Project Subsystems Block Diagram
#See pdf
